- Hello, hello, hello everyone out there.
Rob, Tom, nice to have you all on the show.
- Yeah, thanks for having us.
- Yeah, you bet.
If you're out there watching the live stream,
please put some comments,
and we'll try to make that part of the show.
If you're watching later, thanks for watching.
All right, let's kick this off, guys.
Rob, Tom, welcome to Talk Python to Me.
- Thank you.
- It's good to have you both here.
We get to combine a bunch of fun topics
and important topics, data science, Python,
the cloud, big data, as in physically lots of data
to deal with, and then also climate change
and being proactive about studying that,
trying to make predictions and do science
on huge amounts of data.
- For sure, looking forward to it.
- Yeah, this'll be fun.
- Yeah, absolutely.
Before we get into those, let's just start real quickly.
How'd you two get into programming in Python?
Rob, start with you.
- Yeah, sure, so I've been a developer for,
I don't know, let's say 14 years.
I started at a shop that was doing Sybase Power Builder.
- That goes back a ways.
- That's back a ways.
And I actually, I come from a math background,
so I didn't know a lot about programming
and started using Python just sort of like on the side
to parse some bank statements and do some personal stuff
and started actually integrating some of our source control
at the company with Python and had to write
some C extensions, so got into the Python source code
and started reading that code and being like,
oh, this is how programming should work.
This is really good code.
That year went to my first PyCon.
It was just like all in.
I need to get a different job
where I'm not doing Power Builder.
Yeah, really, I kind of credit Python and the code base
in setting me on a better development path, for sure.
- Oh, that's super cool.
PyCon's a fun experience, isn't it?
- Oh, yeah.
- Yeah, it's like my geek holiday,
but sadly, the geek holiday has been canceled
the last two years.
- Oh, no.
- Yeah.
- Tom, how about you?
- Kind of similar to a lot of your guests, I think.
Was in grad school and had to pick up programming
for research and simulations.
This was for economics.
They started us on MATLAB and Fortran,
which I think goes back maybe further.
I don't know, almost as far as you can go.
And anyway, I didn't really care for MATLAB,
so moved over to Python pretty quickly.
And then just started enjoying the data analysis side
more than the research side.
And got into the whole open source ecosystem
around pandas and stats models and econometrics libraries.
So started contributing to open source, dropped out,
got a job in data science stuff,
and then moved on to Anaconda,
where I worked on open source libraries
like pandas and Dask for a few years.
- Yeah, in a weird turn of coincidence,
I was just, the previous episode was with Stan Sievert,
who you worked with over there, right, at Anaconda?
- Yeah, yeah, so he's the director of community innovation.
And then, yeah, so it was a great place to work at.
Really enjoyed it.
And then I came onto this team at Microsoft
almost a year ago now, working on the planetary computer.
- Yeah, cool.
Well, the planetary computer stuff sounds super neat.
You get to play with all the high-end computers
and the big data and whatnot, right?
- Yeah, it's a lot of fun.
Although I did have a chance to play on,
I think it was Summit,
which is one of our nation's super computers.
- Yeah, that's great. - That was a lot of fun.
- Okay, well, it's hard to beat that, right?
That's one of the ones that's like,
takes up a whole room, a huge room.
That's pretty fantastic. - Yeah, definitely.
- Awesome, all right, well, what are you two doing today?
You're both on the planetary computer project.
Are you, you're working at Microsoft.
What are you doing there?
- Yeah, so we're on a pretty small team
that's building out a planetary computer,
which really is sort of three components,
which is a data catalog, hosting a lot,
petabytes, petabytes of data,
openly licensed satellite imagery
and other datasets on Azure's blob storage.
We're building APIs and running API services
that ETL the data, encode metadata
according to the stack specification,
which we can get into later,
about that, those datasets,
putting them into a Postgres database
and then building API services on top of that.
That's a lot of what I do is manage the ETL pipelines
and the APIs, and then expose that data to users,
environmental data scientists,
and really anybody, it's just publicly accessible.
And yeah, that's sort of my side.
And then there's a compute platform,
which Tom can talk about.
- Yeah, so all this is like in service
of environmental sustainability.
And so we have, our primary users are like people
who know how to code, mostly in Python,
but they're not developers.
And so, you know, we don't want them having to worry
about things like Kubernetes or whatever
to set up a distributed compute cluster.
So that's where kind of this hub comes in
is it's a place where users can go,
log in, get a nice, convenient computing platform
built on top of JupyterHub and Dask,
where they can scale out to these really large workflows
to do whatever analysis they need,
produce whatever derived datasets they need
for them to pass along to their decision makers
in environmental sustainability.
- Yeah, that's super cool, the platform you're building.
People who might have some Python skills,
some data science skills,
but not necessarily high-end cloud programming, right?
With handling lots of data, setting up clusters,
all those kinds of things.
You just push a button, end up in a notebook.
The notebook is nearby petabytes of data, right?
- Right, exactly.
So we'll talk a lot about like cloud native computing
or data analysis.
And so really what that means is just putting the compute
as close as the data as possible.
So in the same Azure region.
- So you just need a big hard drive.
- Really, really, really big hard drive.
- That's what the cloud is, it's one big hard drive.
- Exactly, it is, yeah.
So super neat.
Before we get into it though,
let's just maybe talk real briefly
about Microsoft and the environment.
This obviously is an initiative you all are putting together
to help climate scientists study the climate and whatnot.
But I was really excited to see last year
that you all announced that Microsoft
will be carbon negative by 2030.
- Yeah, for sure.
I mean, Microsoft and prior to me joining Microsoft,
I didn't know any of this,
but Microsoft has been on the forefront of corporate efforts
and environmental sustainability for a long time.
And there's been an internal carbon tax
that we place on business groups
that there's actual payments made
based on how much carbon emission
each business group creates.
And that's been used to fund
the environmental sustainability team and all these efforts.
And that sort of culminated into these four focus areas
and commitments that were announced in 2020.
So carbon's a big one,
not just carbon negative by 2030,
but by 2050, actually having removed more carbon
than Microsoft has ever produced since its inception.
And that's over scope one, scope two, and scope three,
which means accounting for downstream
and upstream providers.
And then there's a couple more focus areas around waste.
So by 2030, achieving zero waste
and around water, becoming water positive
and ensuring accessibility to clean drinking
and sanitation water for more than 1.5 million people.
There's an ecosystem element too,
by 2025, protecting more land than we use.
And then also creating a planetary computer,
which is really using Azure's resources
in the effort to model, monitor,
and ultimately manage Earth's natural systems.
And yeah, so this-
- That's awesome, that's the part you all come in, right?
- Yeah, exactly.
The planetary computers in that ecosystem commitment.
And yeah, that's what we're working towards.
- Yeah, very cool.
Removing all the historical carbon,
I think is pretty fantastic.
And being carbon negative, right?
So much stuff runs on Azure
and on these couple of large clouds
that that actually is a statement
about a large portion of the data center usage as well.
- For sure.
- How many data centers does Azure have?
Like three or four, right?
- I think it's the most.
I think it's the most out of any of them.
- It's a lot, right?
It's over 50 or something like that?
Large data centers?
I don't remember, but it's a big number.
- They're real number all the time too, yeah.
- Yeah, yeah, it's like constant.
So that's a big deal.
Super cool.
All right.
Well, let's talk about this planetary computer.
You told us a little bit about the motivation there
and it's made up of three parts, right?
- Yep.
- All right, yeah, so tell us about it.
- Yeah, so there's technically four parts
because really, we recognize that technology
for technology's sake
is just kind of spinning your wheels, right?
We have to be building all of this data,
all this data access,
the analytics platform towards applying data and insights
to actually making an impact
on environmental sustainability concerns.
And that's done not by us, an engineering team,
like kind of trying to figure out the climate scientists,
right, we're engaging with organizations
to build out applications specifically
on these data and services
and partnering with organizations that have specific goals.
So there's an applications pillar to the planetary computer,
but from an engineering standpoint,
we're mostly focused on the data catalog,
the APIs and the hub that we had touched on briefly.
- Yeah, yeah, and then the applications
is what the partners and other people building on top of it
are really doing, right?
- Exactly, and we participate in that
and help bring different organizations together
to build out the applications
and use the money that we have
to actually fund applications
that are specifically aimed at different use cases.
- Yeah, yeah, very cool.
So there are some other things
that are somewhat like this, right?
Like Google Earth Engine and AWS,
and probably could describe this yourself.
You wanna do a compare and contrast for us?
- Sure. - Either of you?
- Yeah, so Google Earth Engine is sort of the bar that's set
as far as using cloud compute resources for earth science.
And it's an amazing platform
that's been around for a long time
and is really just like a giant compute cluster
that has interfaces into an API
and sort of like a JavaScript interface into it
that you can run geospatial analytics.
And so it's a great, like I said, a great tool.
Can't sing its praises enough.
One of the aspects of it
that make it less useful in certain contexts
is that it is a little bit of a black box, right?
The operations, the geospatial operations
that you can do on it,
the way that you can manipulate the data
are sort of whatever Google Earth Engine provides.
If you wanted to run a PyTorch model
against a large set of satellite imagery,
that's like a lot more difficult.
You can't really do that inside of Google Earth Engine.
You have to like ship data out and ship data in
and getting data in and out of the system is a little tough
'cause it's like sort of a singular solution
and they can optimize a lot based on that.
So the approach we're taking is more a modular approach,
leaning heavily on the open source ecosystems of tools,
trying to make sure that the open source users
are first-class users that we're thinking of first.
And that if people wanna just use our data,
we just have Cloud Optimized GeoTIFF,
these flat file formats on Blob Storage,
go ahead and use it.
You don't have to use any of the other stuff
that we're building.
But if you wanna do spatiotemporal searches over it,
we provide an API that's free access
that allows you to do searches
and get metadata about the data
so you don't have to actually read in the petabytes.
And then also providing the hub experience,
which brings together that really rich
open source ecosystem of Python tooling,
including our tooling and we're also building out
other mechanisms to access this data.
But the current focus is really on that Python data science.
But yeah, considering the open source ecosystem
sort of as our user experience
and try to treat that as like the first-class use case.
- Yeah, that's fantastic.
Tom, tell me if I have this right.
I feel like my limited experience working with this
is you've got these incredible amounts of data,
but they're super huge.
You all built these APIs that let you ask questions
and filter it down into like,
like I just want the map data for this,
you know, polygon or whatever.
And then you provide a Jupyter Notebook
and the compute to do stuff on that result.
Is that pretty good?
- Yeah, that's pretty good.
If you just think like the API is so crucial to have
and we'll get into what it's built on,
but just for like the Python analogy here is like,
imagine that you only had lists for your data structure.
You didn't have dictionaries.
And now you have to like traverse this entire list of files
to figure out where is this one at,
like in space on earth, where is it at?
Or what time period is it covering?
And you know, the nice thing about the API
is you're able to do very fast lookups
over space and time with that
to get down to your subset that you care about
and then bring it into memory on,
ideally on machines that are in the same Azure region,
bring those datasets into memory using tools like X-Array
or pandas and Dask, things like that.
- Yeah, very cool.
So Robbie, you mentioned the Postgres database.
Does that, do you like parse this data
and generate the metadata and all that
and then store some of that information in the database
so you get to it super quick
and then you've got the raw files as blob storage,
something like that?
- Yeah, for sure.
I mean, that's as much metadata that you can capture
and to describe the data so that you can kind of,
you know, do what Tom said and like ignore the stuff
that you don't care about
and just get to the area that you care about.
We try to extract that and we do that according to a spec
that is, it's really interesting,
like community driven spec that,
one of the biggest complaints about dealing
with satellite imagery and this Earth's observation imagery
is that it's kind of a mess.
There's a lot of different scientific variables
and sensor variables and things.
So there's been a community effort over the past,
I'd say three or four years to develop specifications
that make this type of information machine readable.
And so we've kind of bought fully into that
and have processes to look at the data,
extract the stack metadata,
which is just a JSON schema specification with extensions,
and then write that into Postgres.
And one of the things that we, you know,
have been trying to do for like transparency
and contribution to open source
is a lot of that ETL code base, those Python,
the Python code that actually works over the files
and extracts the metadata is open source
in the stack utils GitHub organization.
So we're trying to contribute to that sort of body of work
of how to generate stack metadata
for these different data types.
- You want like the metadata for the exact same image
that's coming from like the USGS public sector data set,
you want the stack metadata to be identical for that,
whether you're using our API or Google Earth engines
who also provides a stack API.
And so like we're working together
on these kind of like shared core infrastructure libraries.
- Yeah, nice.
Well, let's dive into some of the data actually
and talk a little bit about all these datasets.
So a lot of data, as we said over here,
maybe highlight some of the important datasets
that you all have on offer.
- So Sentinel 2 is our largest
and is incredibly important.
It's multi-spectral imagery, optical imagery
that is a 10 meter resolution.
So it's the highest resolution.
And when we talk about satellites,
we often talk about what is the resolution that's captured
because something like Landsat,
which we also have Landsat 8 is 30 meter resolution.
So once you get down to like street level,
you can't really see everything's blurry, right?
- Each pixel represents 30 meters on the ground.
- Exactly. - Right, okay.
- So Sentinel is 10 meter.
You get a lot clearer picture.
You can track if you're doing
sort of deforestation monitoring, for instance,
like you can really track the edge of the deforestation
a lot better with 10 meter imagery.
- Right, or glaciers,
you wanna understand the boundary of it or something.
- Exactly.
And it's still pretty low resolution
compared to commercially available imagery,
but as far as open datasets,
it's a high resolution, it's passively collected.
I think the revisit rate is,
oh, I should have this offhand.
I think it's eight days.
So you can really do like monitoring use cases with that.
It generates petabytes and petabytes of data.
So it's a lot to sort of work over.
I mean, generating the stack metadata for that,
it's like you gotta fire up like 10,000 cores
to kind of run through that.
And you end up actually reaching the limits
of how fast you can read and write from different services.
But yeah, but it's a really great dataset.
A lot of work is being done against Sentinel-2.
- So a lot of what I'm seeing
and I'm reading through here is this annually,
or this from 2000 to 2006,
or like the one we were just speaking about is
since, you know, from 2016.
So this data is getting refreshed
and can I ask questions like,
how did this polygon of map look two years ago
versus last year versus today?
- Totally, yeah.
And you can do that with the sort of API to say,
okay, here's my polygon of interest.
This is over my house or whatever,
you know, fetch me all the images,
but a lot of satellite imagery,
I mean, most of it is clouds.
It's just the earth is covered in clouds.
You're gonna get a lot of clouds.
So there's also a metadata about the cloudiness.
So you can say, okay, well, give me these images over time,
but I want the scenes to be under 10% cloudy.
- Right, I'm willing for it to not be exactly 365 days apart,
but maybe 350 because I get a clear view if I do that,
something like this.
- Exactly, and then you could make a little time-lapse
of how that area has changed over time.
And in fact, I think there was somebody
who actually demoed a time-lapse
of a similar type of time-lapse,
just grabbing the satellite imagery
and turning it into a video over an area.
I forget who exactly that was.
- Yeah, very neat.
Yeah, that one, the Sentinel, the large one,
the revisit time is every five days.
That's a lot of data. - Five days.
Yep. - Yeah.
- Yeah, yeah, it ends up a lot of data, a lot of clouds.
A lot of clouds in the cloud.
- Yeah, what about some of these other ones here?
Got the DayMet, which is gridded estimates
of weather parameters in North America.
That's pretty interesting. - Yeah.
Yeah, so DayMet's actually an example of...
So a lot of our data is geospatial, like satellite imagery,
or things that are derived from that,
like elevation datasets, where you're using the imagery
to figure out what's the elevation of the land,
or things like land cover datasets.
So if you scroll down just a tad,
the land cover dataset there,
that's based on Sentinel, actually.
And so this is saying, for every pixel in Sentinel,
they took like a mosaic over a year.
What is that pixel being used for?
Is it water, trees, buildings, roads, things like that?
So those are examples based off of satellite imagery
or aerial photography.
And then DayMet's an example of something
that's like the output of a climate or a weather model.
So these are typically higher dimensional.
You're gonna have things like temperature,
well, maximum, minimum temperature, water, pressure, vapor,
all sorts of things that are stored
in this really big, n-dimensional cube
at various coordinates.
So latitude, longitude, time,
maybe height above surface.
So those are stored in typically in formats like XAR,
which is this cloud native,
very friendly to object storage,
way of storing chunked n-dimensional arrays.
- Is it like streaming friendly?
You can stream part of it and seek into it,
that kind of thing?
- Exactly, and all the metadata is consolidated,
so you can load in the whole dataset
in like less than a few hundred milliseconds,
but then access a specific subset very efficiently.
- Sure, yeah, very neat.
Another one that's not directly based off of satellites
is the high resolution electricity access, I'm guessing.
And I guess you could sort of approximate it from lights,
but is it, do you think it's light off the satellite?
- I think it is from, Ron, do you know?
Yeah, so I think it's from-
- Yeah, it's VIRS satellite, okay.
So it is off of basically just steady and light,
interesting.
And we have a few more that are coming online shortly,
which are kind of more tabular.
So there's things like US Census gives you like the polygons.
So, you know, the state of Iowa has these counties
or census blocks, which are this shape.
So giving you all those shapes,
and it has this population, things like that.
Things like GBIF has, which is, I think on there now,
has occurrences of like, I think they're like observations
of somebody spotted this animal or plant
at this latitude, longitude, at this time, things like that.
So lots of different types of data.
- Interesting, a mink was spotted
running through the streets, okay.
- Yeah, yeah.
- You have one for agriculture.
That's pretty interesting if you were doing something
with agriculture and farming
and trying to do ML against that.
- Well, yeah, that's interesting
because that's actually run by the National Agriculture,
I think the FDA, but that's actually aerial imagery,
RGB, red, green, blue, and then also infrared aerial imagery
that's collected every, about every three years.
So that's an example of high resolution imagery
that's more than, I think it's one meter resolution.
- Yeah, you can see the little trees and stuff, right?
- Yeah, exactly. - On the coastline.
It's very, very accurate, yeah.
- Great data set specific to the US.
So again, like Sentinel-2 is global in scope,
but if you are doing things in the United States,
NAIP is a great data set to use.
- Yeah, you've got the USGS 3D elevation for topology.
That's cool.
Let's see, and then you have some additional data sets.
What's the difference between the main ones
and these additional ones?
Why are they separated?
- So we're catching up to where our stack API is.
Our stack API has all of the data sets we host,
but the AI for Earth program,
which hosts all these data sets,
has been going on since 2017.
So there's plenty of data sets that they've been hosting
that haven't yet made their way into the API.
And that's just because we're getting there.
It's a bunch of work.
- I see, so for these additional ones,
maybe I could directly access them out of blob storage,
but I can't ask API questions?
- Exactly.
- Okay.
- And then another point, which is kind of interesting,
talking back to the tabular data,
is that some of these data formats aren't quite,
I mean, rasters and imagery fits really nicely in stack,
and we know how to do spatiotemporal queries over them,
but some of these data formats,
they're not as mature as maybe the raster data format,
or it's not as clear how to host them
in a cloud optimized format,
and then host them in a spatiotemporal API.
So we're actually having to do work to say,
okay, what are the standards?
Is it like geo parquet,
or what are the formats that we're gonna be using
in hosting these data sets?
And then how do we actually index the metadata
through the API?
So there's a lot of sort of data format specification,
metadata specification work
before we can actually host all of these in the API.
- Yeah, yeah, really nice.
A lot of good data here, and quite large.
Let's talk about the ETL for just a minute,
'cause you threw out some crazy numbers there.
We're looking at the Sentinel-2 data,
and it gets refreshed every five days,
and it's the earth.
Talk us through what has to happen there.
- Yeah, so for the Sentinel,
it's actually daily,
so it's passive satellite collection.
So the satellites are just always monitoring,
always grabbing new imagery,
and so that comes off to ground stations
through the European Space Agency.
And then we have some partners who are taking that,
converting it to the Cloud Optimus GeoTIFF format,
putting it on blob storage,
at which point we run our ingest pipelines,
look for new imagery, extract the stack metadata,
and insert that into the database.
And we just have that running
in an Azure service called Azure Batch,
which allows us to run parallel tasks on clusters
that can auto-scale.
So if we're doing an ingest of a dataset for the first time,
there's gonna be a lot of files to process,
and we can scale that up.
And it runs Docker containers,
so we just have a project that defines
the Docker commands that can run,
and then we can submit tasks for chunks of the files
that we are processing.
That creates the stack items,
and then another separate process
actually takes the stack items
and inserts it into the database.
- That's cool.
So it's a little bit like data-driven
rather than a little bit like Azure Functions or AWS Lambda,
but processing, we just gotta get all this data
and just work through it kind of at scale.
- Yeah, for sure.
Right now, it's a little bit,
you know, we're still building the plane
as we're flying it,
but the next iteration is actually gonna be
a lot more reactive and based on another Azure service
called Event Grid,
where you can get notifications of new blobs
going into storage and then put messages into queues
that can then turn into these Azure batch tasks
that are running.
- Right, I see.
So you just get something that drops it in the blob storage
and it kicks off everything from there
and you don't have to worry about it.
- Yep.
- And then we publish those to our users,
saying, "Hey, this is ready now,"
if they subscribe to that Event Grid topic.
- Oh, that's cool.
There's a way to get notified of refreshes
and things like that?
- Not yet.
We're hoping to get that end of year,
but yeah, the idea is that we would have
basically a live feed of new imagery.
I mean, what I would really like to see
just for myself, my own interest,
is to be able to have my areas of interest
and then just go to a page that shows
almost an Instagram feed of Sentinel images
over that area.
It's like, "Oh, this new one, it's not cloudy.
"Look at that one."
You know, it's something I'm monitoring.
But yeah, generally we'll be publishing new stack items
so that if you're running AI models
off of the imagery as it comes in,
you can do that processing based off of events.
- Yeah, that'd be cool.
I'm only interested in Greenland.
I don't care if you've updated Arizona or not.
Just tell me if Greenland has changed,
then I'm gonna rerun my model on it or something.
- Right.
Cool.
All right, let's see.
So that's the data part, data catalog.
And then we have the API and the hub,
which I wanna get to,
but I kinda wanna just sort of put some perspective
on what people have been doing with this,
some of your partner stuff under the applications thing.
So Tom, which ones do you think we should highlight
from those that are interesting?
- We kinda talked about the land cover data set.
So we worked with Impact Observatory and Esri to do that.
And so like they were a,
we had some tips about how to use Azure Batch
'cause that's a very big Azure Batch job
to generate that land cover map.
So pulling down the Sentinel data that we're hosting
and then running their model over it.
So that was a fun data set to see come together
and then use now.
The carbon plan, carbon monitoring app,
risk assessment application.
That's like a really cool,
well, so it's a cool like JavaScript application
that you can view risks on.
So these companies are buying like carbon offsets
that are force trees that are planted to offset carbon.
But there's a problem that we know about now
is like the wildfires are burning down
some of those forests.
And so- - Right.
It doesn't help if you planted a bunch of trees
to offset your carbon if they go up in smoke, right?
- Right, yeah.
So carbon plan did a bunch of research, first of all,
on essentially a hub.
They did the research before our hub existed,
but we were working with these community members to,
and they have a very similar setup to what we have now,
to do the research, to train the models and all that,
that goes into this visualization here of how likely,
what are the different risks for each plot of land
in the US?
Yeah, so that was a great collaboration there.
- Yeah, this is neat.
One of the things I was wondering
when I was looking at these is,
you all are hosting this large amounts of data
and you're offering compute to study them.
How does something like carbon plan take that data
and build this seemingly independent website?
- Yeah, yeah.
- Does that run directly on that data
or do they like export some stuff
and then run it on their side?
Or what's the story?
- Yep, so this was,
they would have been doing all like the heavy duty compute
ahead of time to train the models and everything
to gather the statistics necessary to power this.
So then at that point,
it's just a static JavaScript application
just running in your browser now.
- How interesting.
- And I think that's a good point
'cause it's running against our data,
but it's running in their own infrastructure, right?
So it's sort of on the planetary computer,
but it's like really in this case,
like using the planetary computer data sets
in sort of a production setting,
an infrastructure that they own,
which is a use case we really wanna support.
If they need to use search
in order to find the images that they need,
they can use our stack APIs,
but really it's like just an application running in Azure
that in certain cases with our grants program
will end up supporting and sponsoring Azure subscriptions
to run this type of infrastructure.
But at the end of the day,
it's really just applications running in the cloud.
- Right, it's just better if that it's in Azure
that it's nearby,
but they could run it anywhere technically, right?
And just get signed blob storage access or whatever.
- Yeah, we'll throttle access at a certain point
if you're trying to egress too much, but.
- Yeah, I can imagine.
- Yeah. - Yeah.
Yeah, very cool.
I can come over here and zoom in on Portland
and it looks like we're in a decent bit of greenness still.
It does rain up here a lot.
Same for Seattle.
- Yeah, yeah. - Yeah, quite cool.
You talked about this grant program.
What's the story with that?
People out there listening, they're like,
"I wanna get into working with this data
"and building things."
Grant might sound good to them.
What is that?
- Awesome, yeah.
Look up AI for Earth grants.
We have rounds of supporting
folks that are doing environmental sustainability work.
And there's sort of a range of grant rewards.
The lowest level is like giving Azure credits.
Being able to sponsor an account or sponsor resources
for applications that are being developed
or research that's being done
for environmental sustainability.
And we have folks running the grants program
and go take the applications.
And there's different classes that we have
and summits for each of the classes.
And then there's more involved grants and larger grants
as usually as people sort of show progress.
We actually can end up bringing additional resources
or paid projects to accomplish specific goals.
But yeah, if anybody's out there
and they're doing work in environmental sustainability
that could benefit from the cloud,
we'd love to work with you.
- Cool. - And maybe, yeah.
Just to clarify, so there's,
the grants are great for,
like if you have a complex deployment
that's using a ton of Azure services
and you wanna like integrate this all together
and use the planetary computer data,
then the grants are a great approach.
If you're just like an individual researcher
or a team of researchers
or whoever who wants to use this data,
the data's there, it's publicly accessible.
And if you need a place to compute from,
that's in Azure, so close to the data
and you don't already have an Azure subscription,
then you can sign up for a planetary computer account.
And so like that's a way lower bar of barrier to entry.
There's, you just sign up for an account,
you get approved by us
and then you're off to the races.
- That's a great point.
If you think you need a grant to use the cloud,
try using the planetary computer first
'cause you might not.
- Yeah, very good.
So what's the business model around this?
Is there going to be a fee for it?
Is there some free level?
Is it always free but restricted how you can use it?
- So we have- - Right now it's in
like a private beta, right?
I can come down and request access to it?
- Yeah, it's a preview.
We're still like getting access by requiring requests
and there's a larger number of requests
we're approving over time.
We're still coming up with the eventual
final sort of target.
Most likely it will be some sort of limits
around what you can do as far as compute,
as far as like data storage,
once we have features around that.
And with clear off-boarding of like,
if you're an enterprise organization
that wants to utilize this technology,
there should be paid services that allow you
to just as easily do it as you're doing
on the planetary computer.
But if you're doing low usage use cases
or if your use cases is super environmental,
sustainability focused,
and you apply for a grant,
we could end up, you're still using a paid service
but we're covering those costs through our grants program.
So we're still figuring that out as far as,
I don't see this as something that we're trying to
turn into a paid service necessarily.
I think that there's a number of enterprise level services
that could end up looking a lot like the planetary computer,
but really we wanna continue to support uses,
particularly for environmental sustainability use cases
through this avenue.
- One of the nice things about our overall approach is,
since we're so invested in the open source side of things
is if we're, you might've requested an account a while ago
and we're like very slowly going through them
'cause there's just like so much to do,
but if we're too slow approving your account,
then you can replicate the hub
in your own Azure subscription.
So if we're blocking you or if your needs are just like
so vastly beyond what we can provide
within this one subscription,
then yeah, you can go ahead and do your own setup on Azure
and get access to our data from your own subscription.
- Right, because the blob storage is public, right?
- Exactly, yep.
- Okay, yeah, very nice.
Maybe the next two things to talk about
are the API and the hub,
but I think maybe those would be good to see together.
What do you think?
- Yeah, yeah, definitely.
- I think I'll let you talk us through
some scenarios here, Tom.
- Cool, yeah, so I'm, in this case,
I've logged into the hub here, so I've, this is a, yeah.
- Before you go further,
there's a choice you get when you go there.
You've got an account and you click start my notebook up.
- Yeah.
- It's actually gonna fire up a machine
and it gives you four choices, right?
Python with four cores and 32 gigs of memory
and a Pangea notebook.
It gives you R with eight cores and R geospatial
and GPU PyTorch, as well as QGIS,
which I don't really know what that is.
Maybe tell us about getting started.
- QGIS, yeah, yeah.
So this is a JupyterHub deployment.
So JupyterHub's this really nice project.
I think it came out of UC Berkeley
when they were kind of teaching classes,
data science courses to like thousands of students at once.
And, you know, even with like Conda or whatever,
you don't wanna be trying to manage
a thousand students' Conda installations or whatever.
So that's just a nightmare.
So they had this kind of cloud-based setup
where you just log in with your credentials or whatever,
and you get access to a compute environment
to do your homework in that case
or do your geospatial data analysis in this case.
And so this kind of, you mentioned Pangea,
this is this ecosystem of geophysicists, geoscientists
who are trying to do scalable geoscience on the cloud
that Anaconda was involved with.
And so they kind of pioneered this concept
of a JupyterHub deployment on Kubernetes
that's tied to Dask.
So you can create,
easily get a single node compute environment here.
In this case, he's in the Python environment
or multiple nodes,
a cluster of machines to do your analysis
using Dask and Dask gateway.
- Yeah, it's just a Kubernetes-based computing environment.
- That's cool.
And I noticed right away the Dask integration,
which is for like this massive amounts of data, right?
'Cause it allows you to scale across machines
or stream data where you don't have enough to store
in memory and things like that.
- Yep, exactly.
So this is a great thing that we get for Python.
So Dask is Python specific.
We do have the other environments like R
for if you're doing geospatial in R,
which there's a lot of really great libraries there.
That's an option.
That is unfortunately single node.
There's not really a Dask equivalent there,
but there's some cool stuff that's being worked on
like multi-D plier and things like that.
Anyway, and then there's--
- People haven't, yeah, cool.
People haven't seen Dask running in Jupyter notebook.
There's the whole cluster visualization
and the sort of progress computation stuff
is super neat to see it go.
- Yeah, yeah.
So it's when you're doing these distributed computations,
it's really key to have an understanding
of what your cluster's up to.
It's just crucial to be able to have that information there.
- And then the example code that you've got there,
the cloudless mosaic Sentinel-2 notebook,
it just has the basic create me a cluster in Dask,
get the client, create four, up to four to 24 workers,
and then off it goes, right?
- Yeah, exactly.
- What is the limits and how has that worked, right?
As part of getting an account on there,
you get access to this cluster?
- Yep, so this is the first thing
that we talked about today that does require an account.
So the hub requires an account,
but accessing the stack API, which we'll see in a second,
even downloading the data does not require an account.
You can just do that anonymously.
- Yeah, and in this case, I think the limit's like
a thousand cores, something like that,
or some memory limit as well.
So that's the limit that you run into there.
So you can get quite a bit out of this.
- Yeah, that's real computing there.
- Yeah, yeah, definitely.
- A lot of processing power.
- And in this case, we're using Dask adaptive mode.
So we're saying, right now there's nothing to do.
It's just sitting around idly.
So I have three or four workers,
but once I start to actually do a computation
that's using Dask,
it'll automatically scale up in the background,
which is a neat feature of Dask.
Yeah, and so the basic computation,
the problem that we're trying to do here is
we have some area of interest,
which I think is over Redmond, Washington,
Microsoft headquarters,
which we're defining as this bounding box.
- Square, yeah.
- Yeah, yeah, so that--
- Heck.
- Yeah, some sort of, I think that's a polygon,
a square polygon, but anyway.
We draw that out and then we say,
okay, give me all of the Sentinel-2 items
that cover that area.
So again, back to what we were talking about at the start
is like, if you just had files and blob storage,
that'd be extremely difficult to do.
But thanks to this nice stack API,
which we can connect to here
at planetarycomputer.microsoft.com,
we're able to quickly say,
hey, give me all the images from 2016 to 2020
from Sentinel that cover,
that intersect with our area of interest here.
And we're even throwing in a query here saying,
hey, I only want scenes where the cloud cover
is less than 25% according to the metadata.
- Very likely summer in Seattle 'cause the weather--
- Yeah.
- Not so much. - Much fewer.
Yeah, much fewer.
So quickly within a second or two,
we get back the 138 scenes items out of the,
I don't know how many there are in total,
but like hundreds of thousands,
millions of individual stack items that--
- 20 million.
- 20 million, okay.
That comprise Sentinel too.
So we're quickly able to filter that down.
Next up, we have a bit of signing.
So this is that bit that we talked about where,
you know, you can do all this in Anno's MIDI,
but in order to actually access the data,
we have you sign the items,
which basically appends this little token to the URLs.
And then at that point,
they can be opened up by any geospatial program
like QGIS or--
- It converts a private block storage URL
to a temporary public one.
- Yeah, exactly.
- Okay. - Exactly.
- So do that.
- One of the great,
I don't know, it's just like this kind of incidental
happenstance that stack and Dask
actually pair extremely nicely.
If you think about Dask, the way it operates
is it's all about lazily operating,
lazily constructing a task graph of computations.
And then at the end of your, whatever you're doing,
computing that all at once.
That just gives really nice rooms for optimizations
and maximizing parallelization wherever possible.
The thing about like geospatial is,
again, if you didn't have stack,
you'd have to open up these files
to understand where on earth is it?
Like what latitude, longitude does it cover?
- Right, you have to open up all 20 million files
and then look and see what metadata says in it, right?
- Yeah, and in this case, we have like 138 times three files.
So 600, whatever, 450, 600 items, files here.
Opening each one of those takes a few,
maybe 200, 400, 500 milliseconds.
So it's not awful, but it's too slow
to really do interactively on any scale
of any large number of stack items.
So that's where it stacks great.
It has all the metadata.
So we know that this TIFF file,
this Cloud Optimized GeoTIFF file
that contains the actual data,
we know exactly where it is on earth,
what latitude, longitude it covers,
what time period it covers, what asset.
It actually represents wavelength.
So we're able to very quickly stack these together
into this X-ray data array.
In this case, it's fairly small since we've chopped it down.
If we leave out the filtering,
it'd be much, much larger
'cause these are really large scenes.
But anyway, we're able to really quickly
generate these data arrays.
And then using Dask, using our Dask cluster,
we can actually load those, persist those
in distributed memory on all the workers on our cluster.
So that's like- - Yeah, very cool.
- Very easy.
Like it's like a few lines of code,
single function call,
but it like represents years of effort
to build up these stack specification
and all the metadata and then the integration into Dask.
So it's just a fantastic,
fantastic result that we have.
- Yeah, and it's super cool once you,
once you just called data.persist on the Dask array,
you could just see in the dashboard of Dask,
like all of these clusters firing up
and all this data getting processed and yeah, very-
- Yep, exactly.
So in this case, since we have that adaptive mode,
we'll see additional workers come online here.
As we start to stress the cluster, it's saying,
oh, I've got a bunch of unfinished tasks.
I should bring online some more workers
and that'll take either a few seconds
if there's empty space on our cluster or a bit longer.
And then- - Yeah, I feel like
with this, if it just sat there and said,
it's gonna take two minutes and just spun
with a little star, the Jupiter star, that would be boring.
But it has this cool animated little dashboard
and it's like, I'll just, I'm gonna just watch it go.
Look at it go.
It's kind of like defragging your hard dive
with the old days.
(laughing)
It's 'cause you watch these little bars go across.
It's very bizarre, bizarrely satisfying.
- Yep, I will definitely just spend some time
sitting here watching it.
(laughing)
You know, it's simply like monitoring.
There's like a lot of communication here.
There shouldn't be, but really I'm just
watching the lines move.
- While the thing is working,
let me take a question from the live stream.
Simperia asks, can users bring their own data
to this sort of processing or, you know,
'cause you've got the datasets that you have,
is there a way to bring other research data over?
- Yeah, so the answer now is like, yes,
but you kind of have to do a lot of effort
to get it there.
Like, so your own data, you probably,
maybe you do have like your own stack API
and database setup and all of that,
but that's publicly accessible or you have a token for.
So most users don't already have that.
So you can't, there's this real divide
between the datasets that we provide
with our nice stack API and like your own custom dataset
that might be a pile of files and blob storage.
And you could access it that way, certainly,
but there's kind of a divide there.
So that is definitely something
that we're interested in improving
is making user datasets like that are private to you,
feel as nice to work with as our own public datasets.
- Yeah, another thing that I saw when I was looking through
is said under the datasets available, it says,
or if you have your own data
and you'd like to contribute, contact us.
And that's a slightly different question.
They were just asking, you know, that's the one question
was, well, I have my own data, I wanna use it.
This is like how I've, I work at a university or something.
I've got all this data,
I wanna make it available to the world.
What's the story with that?
- Rob, do you wanna do that one?
- Yeah, so we have a backlog of datasets
that we're onboarding onto Azure Blob Storage
and then importing into the API.
Still working through that backlog,
but always on the lookout for good datasets
that have real use cases in environmental sustainability.
If there's a group that's doing some research
or doing building applications
that have environmental sustainability impact
and they need a dataset,
that certainly bumps it up on our list.
So yeah, I would love to hear from anybody
that has datasets that you're looking to expose publicly,
host on the planetary computer for anybody to use
and need a place to host it, yeah.
- Yeah, very cool.
All right, Tom, your graph stopped moving around.
Let's see what might be done.
- Yeah, so we spent quite a while loading up the data
and then that's just how it goes.
You spend a bunch of time loading up data
and then once it's in memory,
computations tend to be pretty quick.
So in this case, we're taking a median over time.
- Is this the median of the image?
What is that a median of?
I heard that means for like a list of the numbers.
I'm not sure what it means for an image.
- Yeah, so this is a median over time.
So our stack here, our data arrays,
a four dimensional array
and the dimensions are time, first of all.
So we had like 138 time slices,
wavelength, so these red, green, blue, near infrared,
Sentinel captures like 10 or 12 wavelengths
and then latitude and longitude.
So we took the median over time
and the idea here is that like stuff like roads
and mountains and forests tend not to move over time.
They're static relatively
compared to something like clouds.
So again, clouds are always a problem.
And once you take the median over time,
you kind of get like the average image
over this entire time period,
which turns out to be an image
that doesn't have too many clouds in it.
- Yeah, it might have no clouds
because if you kind of averaged them out across all of them
'cause you already filtered it down pretty low.
Yeah.
- Yeah, so now we can see a picture of the Seattle area
where it's a cloud free composite or a cloudless mosaic.
- Yeah, beautiful.
Looks like you got, maybe that's,
what is that, Lake Washington
and you've got Rainier there and all sorts of good stuff.
Yeah.
- Yeah, I'm sure.
I actually do not know the geography that well,
but I have been looking at lots of pictures.
We tend to use this as our example area a lot, so.
- Yeah, super cool.
- Anyway, and one nice thing here is like,
so we're again, investing heavily in open source,
investing in building off of open source.
So we have like all the power of X-Ray to use.
X-Ray is this like very general purpose
in-dimensional array computing library.
It kind of combines the best of NumPy and pandas.
In this case, we can do something like a group by,
so if you're familiar with pandas,
you're familiar with group bys,
we can group by time.month.
So I wanna do like a monthly mosaic.
Maybe I don't wanna combine images from January,
which might have snow in them with images from July,
which wouldn't have as much.
So I can do a--
- You can do like 12 different images
or something like that for,
here's what it kind of averaged out to be in February.
- Exactly, and so now we have a stack of images,
12 of them, and we can go ahead and,
representing a median.
So we have multiple years
and we group all of the ones from January together
and take the median of those.
And then we get a nice little group
of cloud-free mosaics here, one for each month.
- Yeah, and sure enough,
there is a little less snow around Rainier
in the summer than in the winter,
as you would in Cascades.
- Yep, definitely.
So that's like a fun little introductory example
to what the hub gives you.
It gets you the single node environment,
which that alone is quite a bit,
you don't have to mess with fighting
to get the right set of libraries installed,
which can be especially challenging
when you're interfacing with like the C
and C++ libraries like GDAL.
So that environment is all set up,
mostly compatible, should all work for you
on a single node.
And then if you do have these larger computations,
we saw it took a decent while to load the data,
even with these fast interop between the storage machines
and the compute machines in the same Azure region,
but you can scale that out on enough machines
that your computations complete
in a reasonable amount of time.
- Yeah, and because the animations,
you don't even mind.
It's super cool.
So you use the API to really narrow it down
from 20 million to like 150 or 138 images
and then keep running on it.
So one thing that I was wondering
when I was looking at this is,
what libraries come included that I can import
and which ones, if there's something that's not there,
maybe I really wanna use HTTPS
and you only have requests or whatever.
Like, is there a way to get additional libraries
and packages and stuff in there?
- Yeah, yeah.
So we do have a focus on geospatial.
So that's like, we'll have most of that there already.
So, X-ray, Dask, Rasterio and all those things.
But if there is something there, our container.
So these are all Docker images built from Conda environments
and that all comes from this repository,
Microsoft/planetary-computer-containers.
So if you just, you want HTTPS,
you add it to the environment.yaml
and we'll get a new image built
and then available from the planetary computer.
And so these are public images.
They're just on the Microsoft Container Registry.
So if you want to use our image,
like you don't wanna fight with getting a compatible version
of say PyTorch and LibJPG.
Not that I was doing that recently,
but if you wanna avoid that pain,
then you can just use our images locally,
like from your laptop.
And you can even like connect to our Dask gateway
using our images from your local laptop
and do like some really fun setups there.
- Yeah, I see.
'Cause most of the work would be happening in the clusters,
the Dask clusters, not locally anyway.
- Yeah, so all the compute happens there
and then you bring back this little image
that's your plot, your result.
- Okay, yeah, very cool.
So how do I get mine in here?
Like I see the containers
and I see you have the last commit here.
- Yeah, so there's one per.
Right now, honestly, the easiest way is to send me,
open up an issue and I'll take care of it for you
just 'cause I haven't got this continuous deployment
quite working out, but there's an environment,
the YAML file there.
- Oh yeah, you go see,
yeah, there's quite a few packages in here already.
- Yep, and those are just the ones we explicitly asked for.
And then all their dependencies get pulled into a lock file
and then built into a Docker images.
And so this is building off a project from Pangeo,
that group of geo scientists that I mentioned earlier,
who have been struggling with this problem
for several years now.
So they have a really nice Docker eyes set up
and we're just building off that base image.
- Cool, yeah, based on the Pangeo container, very cool.
Sam Apria asks, how long is the temporary URL active for,
the signed URL, the blob storage?
- So that actually depends on whether or not
you're authenticated.
We have some controls to say,
the Planetary Computer Hub requires access,
but also you get an API token,
which gives you a little bit longer lasting tokens.
But I forget what the actual current expiries are.
If you use the Planetary Computer Python library,
you just pip install Planetary Industrial Computer
and use that .sign method,
it will actually request a token.
And then as the token is going to expire,
it requests a new token.
So it reads this token and caches it,
but it should be long enough for,
actually pulling down the data files
that we have available, right?
Because we're working against
smaller cloud optimized formats.
There aren't these 100 gig files
that you should have to pull down
and need a single SAS token to last for a really long time.
So you can re-request if you need a new one as it expires.
And like I said, that library actually takes care
of the logic for you there.
- Oh, that's cool, yeah, very nice.
All right, guys, really good work with this.
And it seems like it's early days.
It seems like it's getting started.
There's probably gonna be a lot more going on with this.
- Yeah, for sure.
- Really fun. - I'm gonna go out on a limb
and make a big prediction that understanding the climate
and climate change is gonna be more important,
not less important in the future.
So I suspect that's also gonna grow some interest.
- Might, it might, you know,
and the new report at PCC is making some heavy predictions.
And, you know, within the decade,
you know, we might reach, you know, plus 1.5 Celsius.
And, you know, we're already in it.
We're already feeling the effects.
And, you know, this is the data about our earth
and it's gonna become more and more important
as we, you know, mitigate and adapt to these effects.
So, yeah, I agree.
I think that's a good prediction.
- Yeah, if we, thanks, if we are gonna plan our way out
of it and plan for the future and, you know,
science our way out of it,
we're gonna need stuff like this.
So well done.
All right, I think we're about out of time.
So let me ask you both the final two questions here.
If you're gonna write some Python code,
what editor do you use?
Rob?
- VS Code.
- I suspect I could guess that, but yeah.
- Yeah, actually I was a big Emacs user.
And then when I got this job, switched over to VS Code
'cause it just integrated better with Windows
and then really got into the PyLance and the typing system,
you know, doing type annotations
and basically having a compiler for the Python code.
Like really it changed,
instead of having all of the types in my head
and having to like worry about all that,
actually having the type hinting
was something I wasn't doing a year ago.
And now it's like drastically improved
my development experience.
- It's a huge difference.
Yeah, and I'm all about that as well.
People talk about the types being super important
for things like mypy and other stuff.
And you know, in a lot of cases it can be,
but to me, the primary use case is
when I hit dot after a thing,
I wanted to tell me what I can do.
And if I have to go to the documentation,
then it's kind of like something is failing.
I shouldn't need documentation.
I should be able to just, you know,
auto-complete my way through the world mostly.
- Totally.
And I come from a, I was a Scala developer for,
you know, six, about six years.
So I was used to very heavy, heavily typed system
and kind of got away with it from Python.
I was like, you know what?
I like that there's not types,
but I feel like the Python ecosystem
is really hitting that sweet spot
of like introducing enough typing,
where it's really great.
- And then the inference flies along
for the rest of the program, yeah.
- Totally.
- Yeah.
All right, Tom, how about you?
- VS Code as well for most stuff.
And then Emacs for Magit,
the Git client and then a bit of Vim every now and then.
- Right on.
Very cool.
All right, then the other question is for either of you,
there's like a cool, notable PyPI or Conda package
that you're like, oh, I came across this.
It was amazing.
People should know about it.
Any ideas?
- Tom, you got one?
- Sure.
I'll go with Seaborn.
It's a plotting library from Michael Wascom
built on top of Matplotlib.
It's just really great for exploratory data analysis.
It's just, yeah, easily, you know,
easily create these great visualizations
for mostly tabular data sets, but not exclusively.
- Oh, that's interesting.
I know Seaborn and I knew Matplotlib.
I didn't realize that Seaborn was like,
let's make Matplotlib easier.
- Yeah, essentially for this very specific use case,
you know, Matplotlib is extremely flexible,
but there's a lot of boilerplate
and Seaborn just wraps that all up nicely.
- Yeah, super cool.
All right, well, thank you so much for being here.
Final call to action.
People want to get started
with Microsoft Planetary Computer.
Maybe they've got some climate research.
What do they do?
- Planetarycomputer.microsoft.com.
That'll get you anywhere you need to go.
And then if you want an account,
then it's /account/request, I believe.
- Yeah, there's a big request access right at the top.
You can click that.
Awesome.
- Yeah, exactly.
- All right, Rob, Tom, thank you for being here
and thanks for all the good work.
- Thanks for having us.
- This was great.
- Yep, bye.
- See ya.
Hello?